# Nest Authorization

The `@zen/nest-auth` library contains the common guards & decorators needed to implement authorization for a Nest app. The library implements both Role-based access control (RBAC) and Attributes-based access control (ABAC). All guards and decorators work with both HTTP controllers & GraphQL resolvers.  Utilizing JWTs, authentication is 100% stateless and does not require hitting the database to authenticate users.  This enables horizontal scaling of container replicas in production.

---
## RBAC

`RolesGuard` verifies that the JWT passes verification, extracts the `RequestUser` from the JWT payload, and makes it available to be injected via the `CurrentUser` parameter decorator. `RolesGuard` takes a list of roles for its parameters and checks if the user has at least one of them. The list of static roles for the project can be modified at `libs/common/src/lib/role.ts`.  The following will require the user to have either the `Admin` or `Moderator` roles.

```ts
@UseGuards(RolesGuard('Admin', 'Moderator'))
accountInfo(@CurrentUser() user: RequestUser) { ... }
```

The following will require the user to have both the `Admin` and `Moderator` roles.

```ts
@UseGuards(RolesGuard('Admin'), RolesGuard('Moderator'))
accountInfo(@CurrentUser() user: RequestUser) { ... }
```

If no roles are passed as parameters, the guard will verify that the request has a valid JWT and extracts the `RequestUser` to be ready for injection via `CurrentUser`.

```ts
@UseGuards(RolesGuard())
accountInfo(@CurrentUser() user: RequestUser) { ... }
```

The `AllowAnonymous` decorator allows access for non-authenticated users to individual endpoints. This works for both `RolesGuard` and `CaslGuard`.  The following will allow non-authenticated users access to the `getBlog` endpoint but require a user to have the `Moderator` role for the `editBlog` endpoint.

```ts
@Controller('blog')
@UseGuards(RolesGuard('Moderator'))
export class BlogController {
  @Get()
  @AllowAnonymous()
  getBlog() { ... }
  
  @Put()
  editBlog() { ... }
}
```

---

## ABAC - Experimental

### ⚠️ Parts of this system are experimental
`@casl/prisma` integration is experimental due to requiring a way to recursively validate dynamic Prisma queries with nested get & create operations. The industry does not have a solution to authorize dynamic queries with nested get & create operations yet.  Until a solution is found, it is not recommended to use ABAC to secure your Prisma GraphQL endpoints generated by `@paljs/generator`.  It does not recursively inspect requests to validate any nested get or create operations that may exist.  Theoretically this should be possible to do, though it will most likely require a sophisticated solution involving dynamic programming.  Progress is being made.

Though, ABAC may be the preferred auth scheme for some projects.  Thus, a complete implementation of CASL has been integrated and it is left to the developer which bits and pieces they wish to utilize.  It should be noted that both RBAC & ABAC can be utilized along side one another and the developer should not feel limited to just utilizing one approach.

---

[@casl/prisma](https://casl.js.org/v6/en/package/casl-prisma) is used to implement ABAC over the Prisma schema.  To enable this, set the configuration option `auth.scheme` to `'ABAC'`.

**tools/generate.ts**
```ts
const generator = new ZenGenerator({
  ...
  auth: {
    /** EXPERIMENTAL */
    scheme: 'ABAC',
  }
});
```

The npm script `gen:api` will generate the typings necessary to define CASL abilities with strict typings. There are two source files that centralize the configuration of CASL. These are `casl.factory.ts` & `auth-fields.ts`.

`apps/api/src/app/auth/casl/casl.factory.ts`
```ts
export class AppCaslFactory extends CaslFactory {
  async createAbility(user: RequestUser<Role>) {
    const { can, cannot, build } = new AbilityBuilder<AppAbility>(createPrismaAbility);

    if (user.roles.includes('Super')) {
      can('manage', 'all');
    } else {
      // ... Customize user permissions here
    }

    return build();
  }
}
```

Default fields must be defined explicitly to be included during Prisma queries to ensure that they exist during authorization.  Any fields that CASL ability rules are based on should be included here.  As an example:

`apps/api/src/app/auth/casl/auth-fields.ts`
```ts
import { DefaultFields } from '../../prisma';

const authFields: DefaultFields = {
  User: { id: true, roles: true },
  Blog: { authorId: true },
  ...
};
```

You can then utilize `CaslGuard` in conjunction with the parameter decorator `CaslAbility` to inject the current user's ability.

```ts
@UseGuards(CaslGuard)
async updateBlog(@CaslAbility() ability: AppAbility) { 
  if(ability.can('update', subject('Blog', { authorId: 'abc123' }))) {
    ...
  }
}
```

Alternatively, you can utilize the `CaslPolicy` decorator to apply authorization as a decorator instead of handling authorization within the method.  This approach is rather limited as the CASL ability is the only argument available with no other providers being injectable.  Though, it will suffice for simple ability checks.

```ts
@UseGuards(CaslGuard)
@CaslPolicy((ability: AppAbility) => ability.can('read', 'Blog'))
async getBlogs() { ... }
```

A powerful feature of tightly integrating CASL with Prisma is the ability to get all the records from the database the user has access to.  You can achieve this by utilizing the parameter decorator `CaslAccessible` that takes a Prisma model name as an argument. It will construct the WhereInput given the defined `read` abilities defined in the CASL factory function above.  You can then apply the WhereInput as an `AND` condition in your Prisma query to narrow queries to only accessible records the user has access to.

```ts
@UseGuards(CaslGuard)
async getBlogs(@CaslAccessible('Blog') accessibleWhereInput: Prisma.BlogWhereInput) { 
  const accessibleBlogs = await prisma.blog.findMany({
    where: {
      AND: [
        accessibleWhereInput,
        { /* custom conditions */ }
      ]
    }
  });
}
```